This episode is sponsored by Brilliant.
The Moon has beckoned to humanity throughout
history, and it will soon be our ladder,
extending our reach further into the cosmos.
Today we’ll be looking at the Moon, and
how it might in the century to come serve
as a vital manufacturing and fuel refining
depot and stepping stone.
Interestingly though it’s biggest role in
the near-term will likely be focused on the
development of space closer to home, in orbit
of Earth as the Moon is.
To see why, we first need to ask what the
Moon has to offer and how we will go about
getting stuff off the Moon.
That’s a key point because while the Moon
has plenty of resources, it has little Earth
does not have vastly more of.
It’s also where all our stuff is, including
our factories and scientists and engineers
and everyone else.
This would lead many to think we really have
no interest in the Moon and is one reason
folks often suggesting bypassing it in favor
of Mars or other planets.
And yet the biggest problem with Earth is
that it has so much stuff--as in, mass.
All that mass generates a gravity well you
have to claw your way out of to get into space.
It also means there’s a thick atmosphere
clinging to our world that makes it even harder
to launch things, though easier to land stuff,
much easier actually than on the Moon.
The Moon has no atmosphere to slow ships or
cargoes down as they approach.
It also has surface gravity barely a seventh
of Earth’s, and an escape velocity of just
2400 meters per second or 5400 miles per hour.
Quite fast but barely a fifth of Earth’s,
and it takes less than a fifth as much fuel
to lift something off it.
Gravity wells are not your friend in space
but they get far worse as we pile mass on.
A rocket using a liquid hydrogen fuel to escape
Earth might need 12 tons of fuel to get a
given payload away.
Whereas on the Moon it would only require
.7 tons to to get it off the Moon.
It would be even cheaper in terms of not needing
anything like all the extra mass and equipment
needed to get that spacecraft off Earth reliably
and safely, like fairings, those protective
nose cones on rockets for plowing through
the air, which of course the Moon lacks.
Of course there’s precious little hydrogen
on the Moon, and it’s mostly tied up in
water-ice which we probably want to use for
other things, and there’s obviously no ready
supplies of kerosene or other hydrocarbon
fuel types either.
So we’ll need to consider other types of
fuels, and for that matter if we even want
to use fuels or opt instead for alternatives
like a lunar space elevator or a mass driver.
Space Elevators are nice in that they don’t
require much power to operate, but they do
take some and have other problems we’ll
get to in a bit.
Making chemical fuel or running a mass driver
of the electromagnetic catapult or rail gun
variety both are energy hogs, and so we’ll
need to ask how we’ll go about getting power
on the Moon, all of which we’ll also get
to in a bit.
There are vast amounts of Silicon, Oxygen,
Aluminum, and Iron on the Moon and those last
three can be used to make good fuels.
Of course you mostly need fuel to get stuff
off the Moon, so let’s ask what the Moon
offers us that we want to take away from it
and where we want to take it.
Fiction often shows us moon bases but tend
to be a bit unclear on what they’re really
for, and what they’re not for is growing
food.
At least not for exporting.
You might grow food on the Moon for local
consumption, as opposed to bringing it from
Earth, but you’d probably only use it for
feeding folks in space during the earliest
days and you just happened to find it easier
to expand local production a bit rather than
setting up space farms.
We’ll examine that more in the upcoming
episode “Moon: Crater Cities”
Part of the problem though is that the Moon
has really long days, a month long, half of
which is night which is a long time for plants
to go without illumination.
What light it gets is also harsh, not filtered
by an atmosphere removing the frequencies
more harmful to plants and equipment.
You could grow food there, but either need
to provide supplemental lighting or pick species
that are adapted to handle darkness for long
periods.
You probably need to provide shading too,
as many plants wouldn’t fare well in two
weeks of perpetual noon-time sun.
All-in-all, it makes more sense to use large
rotating habitats in orbit for food growth
instead, especially as these can be made vastly
cheaper than those rotating habitats meant
for people to live in, such as the O’Neill
Cylinder, and we’ll be discussing those
and life inside them in a couple weeks.
Of course you probably do want to grow food
there initially, not to mention source your
rock, air, water, and equipment for those
space farms from the moon, where you can.
Some plants you may want to grow locally for
aesthetics or as specialty fresh foods, like
fruit trees or herbs.
These plants may also be used to recycle waste
products of the colonists.
If you are growing food on the moon you need
power for artificial lighting or rather significant
usage of orbital mirrors to send light down,
which is certainly doable and we may as well
begin our discussion of power with solar as
an option.
We’ve got three ways we can use sunlight
and three places to obtain it from.
We can use it for plants or other processes
that directly make use of light, like a solar
kiln for smelting metal or rock, or we can
use it for power generation, either solar
thermal or photoelectric.
Photoelectric being the solar panels we’re
used to, while solar thermal is where you
use the concentrated sunlight to heat something
and run a standing heat engine, such as a
steam turbine, like we use in conventional
power plants.
Solar panels are a bit problematic on the
Moon because you have that two-week dark phase,
though they don’t have to worry about cloudy
weather and there are many craters whose rims
experience longer daylight periods.
Indeed one of the proposed methods to maximize
the exposure of solar panels is to hang them
like curtains from tall towers, following
the sun, extending the daylight as the sun
sets.
For the same reason, polar craters are also
logical base locations due to the extremely
long daylight possible on their crater rims
and from the ice we hope to find at their
eternally dark bottoms.
And again we’ll look at that more in Crater
Cities.
On the photosynthesis side of things, those
extended light periods experienced on crater
rims might be sufficient to allow plants there
to remain healthy as opposed to two full weeks
of darkness, and would at least cut down on
supplemental lighting.
These are good spots for initial space farming
though obviously are in a limited supply.
Eventually, a lunar industrial complex will
be producing so much power for metals refining,
chemical processing, and manufacturing that
a few small farms worth of LED lights won’t
really amount to much in your power budget.
But in the end the vast majority of food production
will be done on large factory farms and food
processing facilities in space once the cost
of landing a shipment of groceries is less
than your local cost.
Similar to how you might have an orange tree
or small garden, but your not locally sourcing
a cake recipe.
But back to solar panels, modern, efficient
ones are rather hard and expensive to fabricate
locally from ISRU, or in situ resource utilization,
the term used for basically living off the
land.
Though that might get far easier down the
road, the raw sunlight, heavy on ultraviolet,
and damaging moon dust and micrometeorites,
might be rather rough on such panels.
There are designs for less-efficient, simple
solar panels made from ISRU materials that
can almost be paved on the lunar surface.
The problem with these is that they need to
be cleaned of lunar dust frequently if they
are to be located anywhere near a mining base
or rocket landing pad.
They are also fixed so they can’t follow
the sun, and because there is no atmosphere
to refract or reflect the sunlight like on
Earth, this further reduces their efficiency.
Fabricating more rugged or structural ISRU
solar panels, such as those we discussed hanging
like curtains, will take more resources and
cost more, but would allow sun-following.
Lastly, while concentrated solar may allow
better use of your solar panels, they can
have thermal management problems in space,
further adding to their cost and complexity.
Adding to solar power’s short-comings is
the limitation of battery capacity to function
through the night, away from the poles.
Solar thermal on the other hand is particularly
nice on the moon because big mirrors and parabolic
dishes are easily fabricated, they can just
be shiny bits of aluminum or iron, neither
in short supply on the moon.
Additionally, there’s no air, and heat can
only be lost via radiation, convection, and
conduction, so you can turn your mirrors onto
giant blocks of basalt – which is plentiful
on the moon and a great medium for heat storage
and they won’t cool off as much at night
as it’s just the vacuum above them, not
air or water also acting as a coolant by convection.
This is especially true if we cut blocks of
basalt and basically stick them in a thermos,
vacuum on all sides.
So no convective losses from the vacuum and
only minor conductive losses in the thermos
and radiative losses can be minimized with
a reflective barrier.
Quite the thermal battery.
That’s a bit sophisticated, so early on
you might just use a chunk of basalt up off
the ground on insulating feet to minimize
heat loss to conduction, or in a pit where
you kept a bowl up on feet and filled it with
gravel.
You can even skip that for focusing light
on a big chunk of basalt but you’d lose
more heat to conduction into the neighboring
rock.
We call this approach a Thermal Wadi, as opposed
to Wadis in the desert, dry spots that fill
with water in the rainy season, in this case
we fill them with light and heat in the sunny
season, every month.
Now we can attach those blocks to a heat engine
and have a nice power supply when the sun
goes down.
Needless to say, you can also use these to
keep bases warm when the sun goes down, or
for that matter cold when the sun is up.
You can also be using solar kilns in this
role as well as their role of melting down
metal or rock, and solar kilns work better
on the moon from the lack of atmosphere anyway.
Using these approaches lets you avoid needing
to have a month-long production cycle that
is on during the day and off during the night,
or at least lets you avoid a total shut down
at night, though we often do long on and off
production cycles in some industries, such
as metal smelting, here on Earth, and could
on the Moon if we needed to, and we might
early on as we need to start very simple.
It’s not very hard then, with some fairly
basic infrastructure, to get major metal production
going on the moon and it can be massively
scaled up.
You benefit a lot from having clever robots
do the work rather than people but you don’t
actually have to live on the Moon to work
there.
The signal lag time from Earth is just a heartbeat
or two, enough time to be noticeable and irritating
but close enough to allow remote control of
facilities and robots.
Now I said there were three basic ways we
could use sunlight but also three places we
could get it from.
The first is obviously the surface of the
Moon, and the second would be advanced power
production by nuclear fusion, where sunlight
comes from in the first place, but while we’ll
be looking at nuclear fission as a power source
and ship drive today, we’ll skip fusion
as a topic we’ve covered more elsewhere.
Our third way is just to remember that the
Moon has very little gravity and no atmosphere.
That makes producing power satellites or mirrors
and getting them into orbit a good deal easier,
and it would not be hard to coordinate those
to get power or light to places when it was
dark outside, scaled up enough you could even
create a 24 hour day cycle but we’ll skip
that for today.
See the Power Satellites episode or Winter
on Venus for more discussion of those options.
However, while putting stuff in orbit of the
Moon isn’t too hard, that low gravity and
lack of wind makes it very easy to erect massive
structures.
I mentioned those tall towers and putting
our solar panels on them.
Building some super-high, strong, and skinny
tower on the Moon is very easy.
Indeed it is so easy that we can build a space
elevator on the Moon out of existing materials,
not needing the very strong materials like
Graphene and Carbon Nanotubes an Earth Elevator
would take.
Sounds like a great idea but there is one
problem, the Earth.
The Moon perturbs the orbits of objects around
the Earth somewhat.
But the Earth has 81 times the mass of the
Moon, and it perturbs orbits around the Moon
a lot.
If you were to build an elevator on Earth,
you’d put its center of mass in a geostationary
orbit.
That’s where it will orbit the planet at
the same rate the planet turns, so it will
stay directly above your chosen spot on the
equator.
The altitude of a geostationary orbit is about
1/10th of the way to the Moon, so the Moon’s
gravity does perturbs the orbit some but only
to a degree we can manage and compensate for.
If the Moon had a nice short day like we do,
it would work about the same there.
But the Moon is tidally locked to Earth, so
its day is a month long, and a luna-stationary
orbit would have to be a month long as well.
That means it would have to orbit the Moon
at an altitude that takes it 1/4 of the way
back to the Earth, a distance where the Earth
actually exerts far more force on your satellite
than the Moon does.
There is the L1 Lagrange point between the
Earth and Moon, where the forces exactly balance
each other, and it’s only about 1/7th of
the way back to the Earth.
The problem is, it’s not stable.
If your satellite drifts off the Earth-Moon
axis, gravity will pull it back, but if it
drifts either way along that axis, it will
start falling toward whichever body it’s
now closer to.
The L2 Lagrange point above the far side of
the Moon is similarly unstable.
The only stable Lagrange points, where you
could put a satellite in a true luna-stationary
orbit, are the L4 and L5 points that respectively
lead and lag the Moon in orbit around the
Earth.
Unfortunately, those are actually as far from
the Moon as the Earth is—not very helpful
when you’re trying to build an elevator.
Now again neither is stable either, and while
we can use some of the tricks we discussed
in space elevators, like multiple tethers
reaching up at angles to a common terminus,
and also have some options for polar elevators,
it’s not a great option.
Sky hooks, also known as rotavators, work
a bit better since without an atmosphere and
with a lower gravity and orbital speeds you
can have one swing right down and snag something
off the ground.
We looked at those in detail in early episodes
of our Upward Bound series, and followed them
up with a device called a mass driver, think
giant space gun.
Those can work on Earth but are problematic
because you need to reach higher speeds and
you have to use an entirely enclosed runway
or barrel to keep the air out and also have
to have the muzzle sticking up tens of kilometers
above the ground to avoid your vehicle slamming
out of the barrel into the atmosphere at re-entry
speeds.
Needless to say, it’s also quite an engineering
feet to build a tower tall enough to hold
that muzzle up.
That is far easier on the moon, what with
the low gravity and lack of wind in the atmosphere
shoving on that tower, but you don’t need
to bother because there’s no atmosphere
you need to get above.
You can just run a long metal track on the
ground to build up speed and let go once you
hit orbital speed.
All of those are options that work on the
Moon, and the mass driver is probably the
easiest and best for most applications, but
you might not even bother since again, it
doesn’t take too much fuel to get stuff
off the Moon and as we’ll get to in a moment,
that’s likely to be the main industrial
production of the Moon, or one of the big
ones anyway.
I should note though that landing stuff on
the Moon is a good deal trickier if you want
to avoid using rockets, there’s no air to
help you slow down.
Trying to rely on sheer friction, like a runway,
is not a good idea since you’re still moving
very fast and safely coordinating that would
be dubious.
The skyhooks are nice options for slowing
down, the elevator too, and one could potentially
harpoon a ship like we discussed in Colonizing
Ceres or even use some corridor runway filled
with low-density gas for breaking,
Of course fuel works pretty well and I did
mention that would be a big export.
You can make fuel out of water, with enough
power, you just break it down into hydrogen
and oxygen then burn those as your fuels,
but we don’t know how much water-ice is
on the moon and we probably don’t want to
be using that up, so it might work okay in
the early days as a short term fuel but not
something we will use in the long term.
We will need to use common lunar ISRU materials
and first among those available is oxygen,
of which the moon is roughly 40% by mass,
and it will practically be a waste product
of our industrial activities, as things like
iron and aluminum will be found as oxides
we need to seperate to get the pure metal.
ALICE, Aluminum-Ice rockets, using nano-aluminum
powder and water ice are tempting but again
it uses up water, or more specifically hydrogen,
not ideal for heavy space usage.
But we can use aluminum and liquid oxygen
as a monopropellant gel or as a bi-propellant,
and also aluminum, iron, and oxygen, also
known as thermite, and of course Magnesium,
which also has a very energetic reaction with
oxygen, is readily available on the moon.
None of these is exactly ideal as a main ship
propellant, though they do work well enough
and work very well for things like station-keeping
and orbital maneuvering, which is going to
be the biggest fuel usage in a robust Cis-Lunar
Economy, where most of the ships will be moving
around Earth-Moon orbital space and which
will probably be collecting a growing number
of space habitats, power stations, factories,
farms and so on as time rolls on.
The Moon however is also rich in uranium and
thorium, and noticeably lacking in delicate
ecologies, so it’s a great place to build
fission reactors as well as radioisotope thermal
generators, RTGs, one of our favorite electric
supplies for spacecraft.
You can also build some disgustingly simple
nuclear rocket drives that, while filthy as
heck, enough that it would probably be a war
crime to use them in Earth’s atmosphere
or low-orbit, do well enough in deep space
or on the Moon.
Nuclear makes a nice power supply for those
dark weeks on a moon base and RTGs, mostly
made of radioisotopes like Strontium-90 or
Plutonium-238, would make excellent power
supplies for spaceships and satellites and
moon rovers where solar wasn’t a good option.
Of course we also have the RTT, Radioisotope
Thermal Thruster, which differs from an RTG
somewhat.
An RTG uses thermocouples to turn the radioactive
heat decay into electricity.
They are very durable and reliable with no
moving parts to break or wear down, and are
easy to build, though very inefficient at
conversion, usually under 10%.
The RTT, or Poodle Thruster, is the same;
it just uses that heat to produce rocket thrust
instead.
These unfortunately can not be throttled in
their thermal power output, RTGs and RTTs
produce a constant power supply, though by
changing how much propellant you use you can
throttle your thrust, though it slowly weakens
as the material decays, dropping to half after
one half life.
And of course you have all that lunar oxygen
you can use for propellant.
This is also not bad for station keeping or
objects that run back and forth constantly,
like a shuttle between the Moon’s orbital
Station and Earth’s, assuming anyone lets
you bring it near Earth, though they’re
not too dangerous if one gets wrecked and
crashes on Earth and aren’t ideal bomb material
either.
We’ve never truly had a nuclear economy
on Earth, even in those places where fission
makes up a large part of the power generation,
so it’s a bit hard to really state how much
of an industrial engine that is.
The Moon, and space in general, is already
a radiation nightmare so being able to run
massive nuclear torch drive ships and atomic-powered
foundries, smelters, and mass-drivers is a
big deal.
If you go all in on that you can start turning
out aluminum and steel at ridiculous outputs,
and that gives you the massive construction
capacity you need for building up a true space
infrastructure.
Safety really is not an issue, but we already
detailed non-atomic options like solar kilns
if we need them instead.
Nuclear is more attractive in many regards
and could turn the Moon into an Industrial
Nuclear Juggernaut.
So that covers fuel.
Fuel for station-keeping and running around
the Cis-Lunar volume of space.
But fuel, be it chemical fuels like Aluminum
or nuclear rockets, that can also be used
for running ships back and forth to Mars or
the Asteroid Belt or even out to the icy moons
of the gas giants to retrieve ice for water
and fuel if the Moon doesn’t have enough.
Oxygen too, the Moon has plenty of it, but
not so much nitrogen or carbon and plants
need those too, and these are elements you
can find plentifully out deeper in space,
in the form of Nitrogen gas, ammonia-ice and
methane.
Methane and ammonia are nice stable sources
of hydrogen, and methane is 25% hydrogen by
mass and ammonia is 18%, while water is only
11%, and the remainder is oxygen, which is
beyond plentiful on the Moon and as mentioned
likely to be a waste product of many of our
other activities there.
Hydrogen is a critical item for good space
travel as it’s our best propellant, so with
it being rare on the Moon and hard to get
off Earth, your first big supply chain is
to get hydrogen back to the Moon.
It’s easier to think gas giants, but actually
getting hydrogen off them is no mean feat,
and raw hydrogen is not easy to transport,
so methane is your preferred source, off icy
bodies, and water and ammonia your nominal
runners up, needless to say both are very
handy for other things too.
Comets are also nice sources for those.
We’re trying to keep ourselves pretty low-tech
and near term in this episode, so we’re
focused on the stuff that’s easier to do
now in terms of both existing technology and
easy deployment, see Industrializing the Moon
or Battle for the Moon for some of the more
high-tech scenarios.
But whether you’re running out to the rim
of the Asteroid Belt beyond the frost-line
or to the Moons of Jupiter or Saturn, that
gives us some nice imports.
Hydrogen, carbon and nitrogen for fuel and
food production, plus all those nice metal
ores that are available in the asteroid belt
and in the less mentioned but no less valuable
hoard of tiny moons and asteroids around those
two huge planets.
You can send crews out to those and setup
bases, but extracting ices, water, methane,
or ammonia, is a very easy bulk extraction
process that can probably be done by fairly
dumb machines with just a few nudges by controllers
acting remotely from a light hour away, and
those Poodle Thrusters make a very nice ship
drive and power source for those kind of remote
operations too.
Poodle Thrusters do need refilling on propellant
so are good for ice mining, where they can
re-stock, and I can well imagine the Moon
mass producing some sort of small probes that
fly out to those icy bodies to survey them,
latch onto patches of ice to refuel on propellant
and drill samples, and wandered off to the
next target, with bigger collectors following
up for extraction.
Fundamentally the Moon is a great source for
anything that we want in space in larger bulk
quantities, like metal, but it’s also nice
for things like Rare Earth Elements that are
often rather rough to get economically on
Earth while also being environmentally friendly,
which is fine on the Moon where there’s
no environment to befriend.
Not a bad place to get phosphorus either,
something we have a supply problem with here
on Earth, and it should be noted that while
it takes a lot of fuel and money to get off
Earth, getting home is easy and cheap, so
you probably can export stuff that isn’t
precious metals home to Earth.
It’s got precious metals too.
It’s easy to forget when discussing asteroid
mining and coming home with trillion dollar
rocks full of gold and platinum that the Moon
considerably outmasses the entire asteroid
belt and has more of every metal than it does,
albeit sometimes harder to extract.
But ‘hard’ is a relative concept and all
those wonderful craters and lavatubes make
nice bases to hide from micrometeors and the
Sun’s blistering radiation, and that proximity
to Earth allows remote control of any device
and rapid extraction or evacuation of personnel
back to Earth in emergencies, or sending in
search and rescue teams.
Out on Mars or in the Asteroid belt, you’re
in deep trouble if anything goes wrong, because
no one is coming and even advice and suggestions
by radio will take an hour to reach you, not
a couple seconds.
For this reason and many more, the Moon is
a great place to be building up our industrial
might for space.
Maybe not an ideal place to live though, and
we’ll discuss some options for that in a
couple weeks.
We were talking a lot today about rocketry
and orbital concepts, and those are quite
vital to contemplating space industrialization
but can be rather confusing.
If you want to get a better understanding
of this concept and a lot of other core physics,
I’d recommend trying out Brilliant’s Course
on Classical Mechanics, which has almost 50
interactive quizzes including one on the Rocket
Equation.
Brilliant is an online learning community
with over 60 interactive courses and many
quizzes and puzzles, plus Daily Challenges
that help get the brain warmed up for the
day.
Those Challenges provide a context and framework
that you need to tackle, so that you learn
the concepts by applying them, which is the
best way to learn new concepts.
Brilliant makes learning fun and easier, and
their online community gives you places to
discuss the material or ask questions, and
their mobile apps offline feature lets you
take courses even when you’re not getting
a good signal.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
So as I mentioned, we’ll be returning to
the Moon in a few weeks to take a look at
Crater Cities, but before then we’ll ask
the big question of why life exists next week.
We also talked a lot today about how the Moon
might come to be a major colony one day, but
would most likely be powering that growth
by providing the raw materials to build vast
number of habitats in orbit of Earth, in immense
space stations such as the O’Neill Cylinder,
and in two weeks we’ll take a look at what’s
it’s like to be a resident of one of them,
in “Life on Board an O’Neill Cylinder”.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you’d like to support future episodes,
visit our website, IsaacArthur.net, to donate
to the channel or check out some of the awesome
SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a Great Week!